>> Sreenivasan: IN JULY WE
BROUGHT YOU A STORY ABOUT
POVERTY IN ALABAMA, WHICH WAS
SPURRED BY A REPORT FROM THE
UNITED NATIONS' SPECIAL
RAPPORTEUR ON EXTREME POVERTY
AND HUMAN RIGHTS, PHILIP ALSTON.
ALSTON TOURED AMERICA,
SPOTLIGHTING THIRD-WORLD-STYLE
POVERTY IN OUR FIRST-WORLD
COUNTRY.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT SIMON OSTROVSKY
CONTINUES FOLLOWING IN ALSTON'S
FOOTSTEPS WITH A REPORT ON
POVERTY IN LOS ANGELES.
SUPPORTED IN PART BY A GRANT
FROM THE PULITZER CENTER ON
CRISIS REPORTING, THIS REPORT IS
PART OF OUR ONGOING SERIES ABOUT
POVERTY AND OPPORTUNITY IN
AMERICA-- "CHASING THE DREAM."
>> Reporter: LOS ANGELES.
THE HOME OF SOME OF THE MOST
DESIRABLE ZIP CODES IN THE
COUNTRY.
BUT RIGHT AT THE HEART OF THIS
WEALTHY METROPOLIS EXIST
CONDITIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
DESCRIBED BY THE CITY'S OWN
NEWSPAPER, THE LOS ANGELES TIMES
AS A "NATIONAL DISGRACE."
ONE EXPANSE OF 50 CITY BLOCKS IS
AN AREA THAT HAS BECOME
SYNONYMOUS WITH POVERTY, CRIME,
AND HOMELESSNESS.
IT'S EXISTED FOR DECADES AND HAS
DOGGED SUCCESSIVE MAYORAL
ADMINISTRATIONS THAT'VE TRIED TO
ERADICATE IT.
IT'S CALLED "SKID ROW" AND IS
HOME TO AN ESTIMATED 2,000
MEMBERS OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY'S
HOMELESS COMMUNITY.
>> L.A. HAS ONE OF THE HIGHEST
RENTS IN THE NATION.
AND THE REASON WHY COME TO SO
MANY TENTS OUT HERE BECAUSE
PEOPLE CAN'T AFFORD TO LIVE IN A
HOUSE.
>> Reporter: STEVE RICHARDSON,
WHO GOES BY THE NAME "GENERAL
DOGON," IS AN ACTIVIST AT THE
L.A. COMMUNITY ACTION NETWORK,
WHICH ADVOCATES FOR THE CITY'S
HOMELESS COMMUNITY.
>> THE MAJORITY OF THE PEOPLE
THAT YOU SEE SLEEPING ON THE
STREETS ARE BLACK AND THESE ARE
FOLKS THAT HAVE FELL TO THE
POVERTY LEVEL.
IT MAKES ME REALLY MAD.
>> Reporter: LONG THE SUBJECT OF
LOCAL AND NATIONAL CONCERN, SKID
ROW RECENTLY GARNERED
INTERNATIONAL ATTENTION WHEN IT
BECAME THE FOCUS OF A REPORT
WRITTEN BY THE UNITED NATIONS
RAPPORTEUR ON EXTREME POVERTY.
PHILIP ALSTON WHOSE JOB MORE
OFTEN INVOLVES ASSESSING
CONDITIONS IN THE DEVELOPING
WORLD.
>> THE HOMELESSNESS ON THE
STREETS IN L.A. IS PRETTY
STAGGERING IN TERMS OF
MAGNITUDE, IN TERMS OF HOW LONG
RUNNING IT IS.
THERE IS A CHRONIC SHORTAGE OF
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> Reporter: NATIONALLY,
HOMELESSNESS HAS BEEN MOSTLY ON
THE DECLINE SINCE 2010, THOUGH
IT TICKED UPWARD SLIGHTLY IN
2017, TO NEARLY 554,000 PEOPLE
WITHOUT THEIR OWN ROOF OVER
THEIR HEADS IN A SO-CALLED
POINT-IN-TIME COUNT.
THE LOS ANGELES AREA MEANWHILE,
HAS TRENDED IN THE OPPOSITE
DIRECTION AS THE COST OF LIVING
HERE SOARED OVER THE LAST DECADE
FORCING THOUSANDS ONTO THE
STREET IN WHAT HAS AMOUNTED TO A
NEARLY 50% INCREASE IN
HOMELESSNESS SINCE 2012 TO
ALMOST 53,000 PEOPLE.
THE SHEER SIZE OF SKID ROW MAKES
IT LOOK LIKE A REFUGEE CAMP.
BUT ACCORDING TO A 2017 REPORT
BY SEVERAL HOMELESSNESS ADVOCACY
GROUPS, THE AVAILABILITY OF
TOILETS HERE IS WORSE THAN IN A
U.N.-RUN SYRIAN REFUGEE CAMP.
>> IT SMELLS OF URINE
EVERYWHERE.
SKID ROW HAD ABOUT 10 TOILETS, I
THINK, FOR THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE.
SO IT'S A PRETTY BAD SETUP.
>> SO THIS IS UH, THEY CALL IT
THE BIG GREEN MACHINE.
AND, UH, IT'S A BATHROOM.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE LA
COMMUNITY ACTION NETWORK, NEARLY
1,800 UNSHELTERED PEOPLE IN SKID
ROW SHARE ACCESS TO JUST NINE
TOILETS LIKE THIS ONE WHICH
MEANS MANY AVOID THEM ALTOGETHER
AND USE BUCKETS WHICH ARE THEN
EMPTIED INTO THE STREETS AND
TRASH CANS.
>> THAT WAS P.T.S.D., BUT I
DIDN'T KNOW NOTHING ABOUT THAT.
>> Reporter: WILLY VAN SEALS IS
A VIETNAM VET SUFFERING FROM
HEROIN ADDICTION, ONE OF ALMOST
3900 HOMELESS VETERANS IN L.A.
COUNTY.
>> I'LL SHOW YOU.
THE BUCKETS THAT WE USE, ARE TO
URINATE, BOWEL MOVEMENT.
THERE'S NOWHERE AROUND HERE TO
USE THE BATHROOM, AND THAT'S
HARD ON A PERSON YOU KNOW WHAT I
MEAN?
SUPPOSE YOU WALK AROUND FIND
SOMEWHERE TO TAKE A CRAP?
COME ON NOW.
>> Reporter: THE AUTHORITIES
KNOW HYGIENE IS AN ISSUE HERE.
THE COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT
REPORTED THAT ITS TEAMS OBSERVED
FECES AND URINE ON EIGHT OF TEN
SIDEWALKS DURING A SURVEY BACK
IN 2012.
STREET WASHES LIKE THIS ONE HAVE
BEEN INSTITUTED TO HELP STOP THE
SPREAD OF DISEASE.
>> IF WE DON'T POWER WASH THE
STREETS WE END UP WITH WHAT WE
HAD YEARS AGO WHEN WE HAD A
TUBERCULOSIS OUTBREAK OR
HEPATITIS OUTBREAK OR SOME KIND
OF DISEASE, IT HAS TO BE DONE,
IT HAS TO BE DONE.
>> Reporter: OFFICER DEON JOSEPH
HAS BEEN PATROLLING THE STREETS
OF SKID ROW FOR CLOSE TO TWO
DECADES.
HE SAYS HE'S SEEN WELL-MEANING
POLICIES TO IMPROVE HEALTH
CONDITIONS BACKFIRE.
>> YEARS AGO WE HAD 27 PORTA
POTTIES IN SKID ROW.
MY CONCERN WAS THAT THEY WOULD
BE TAKEN OVER BY THE CRIMINAL
ELEMENT, AND DAY ONE THAT'S
EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED.
UH, WHEN THOSE BATHROOMS WERE
HERE, GANGSTERS WERE CHARGING
THE HOMELESS ONE TO FIVE DOLLARS
TO USE THE PORTA POTTIES FOR
WHAT THEY WERE DESIGNED FOR.
>> Reporter: WHILE WE'RE WITH
HIM OFFICER JOSEPH RECEIVES A
COMPLAINT.
>> I'VE GOT THESE PEOPLE WHO
HAVE PULLED UP IN FRONT OF THE
DOORWAY.
I'VE ASKED THEM REPEATEDLY TO
MOVE AND TRYING TO HAVE A
RATIONAL CONVERSATION WITH
IRRATIONAL PEOPLE.
I JUST DON'T WANT TO DO IT.
>> HOW ARE YOU?
I'M SORRY TO BOTHER YOU.
THERE'S A GENTLEMAN HERE WHO HAS
A BUSINESS, AND THE LAW SAYS YOU
CAN'T BE WITHIN 10 FEET OF HIS
DOORWAY, CAN YOU GUYS MOVE ABOUT
10 FEET THIS WAY SO HE CAN HAVE
HIS SPACE?
>> Reporter: HE RESOLVES THE
SITUATION WITHOUT INCIDENT.
BUT THE U.N. REPORT POINTS TO
DATA FROM THE "L.A. TIMES"
SHOWING THAT 14,000 HOMELESS
PEOPLE WERE ARRESTED IN L.A. IN
2016, A 31% INCREASE SINCE 2011.
THE REPORT ENCOURAGED
AUTHORITIES TO SHIFT FROM A
"CRIMINAL JUSTICE RESPONSE" TO
A "HUMAN RIGHTS-CENTERED
RESPONSE" TO HOMELESSNESS.
>> HOMELESSNESS IS BEING
CRIMINALIZED IN MANY WAYS.
AND IT'S AS THOUGH YOU SORT OF
KEEP MOVING THE PIECES AROUND
THE CHESSBOARD AND SUDDENLY IT'S
GOING TO IMPROVE, INSTEAD OF
SAYING "OK, WE ACTUALLY NEED TO
WORK OUT HOW TO CREATE PLACES
WHERE THESE PEOPLE CAN GO."
>> I AGREE WITH THE U.N., WE
SHOULDN'T BE THE TIP OF THE
SPEAR, FIX THE SYSTEM ESPECIALLY
IN PLACES LIKE SKID ROW WHERE
MANY INDIVIDUALS STRUGGLE WITH
DUAL DIAGNOSIS WHERE THEY'RE
ADDICTS AND MENTALLY ILL.
WE DON'T WANT TO BE THE TIP OF
THE SPEAR BUT WE HAVE TO BE
UNTIL THOSE SOLUTIONS ARISE.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO VICTOR
HINDERLITER OF THE LOS ANGELES
HOMELESS SERVICES AUTHORITY,
MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTION ARE
A HUGE FACTOR CONTRIBUTING TO
HOMELESSNESS.
>> APPROXIMATELY 30% OF PEOPLE
EXPERIENCING HOMELESSNESS SELF-
REPORT THAT THEY HAVE A SEVERE
MENTAL HEALTH DISORDER, ABOUT
30% OF PEOPLE EXPERIENCING
HOMELESSNESS SELF-REPORT THAT
THEY HAVE A SUBSTANCE USE
DISORDER.
HOMELESSNESS, IN AND OF ITSELF
IS A TRAUMATIC EXPERIENCE.
>> Reporter: CHRISTINA MILLER,
THE L.A. MAYOR'S SENIOR PROJECT
MANAGER OF HOMELESS STRATEGIES
AGREES THAT ADDRESSING
HOMELESSNESS IS A MULTI-TIERED
PROCESS BUT DISAGREES THAT THE
HOMELESS ARE BEING CRIMINALIZED.
>> INSTEAD OF LEADING WITH
POLICE, LEADING WITH
ENFORCEMENT, WE ARE DOING
EVERYTHING WE CAN TO LEAD WITH
SERVICES BECAUSE WE KNOW THAT
POLICE OFFICERS ARE NOT SOCIAL
WORKERS AND THAT IS NOT
NECESSARILY IN THEIR PURVIEW AND
HAVING AN ENFORCEMENT HEAVY
RESPONSE IS NOT ULTIMATELY GOING
TO GET PEOPLE OFF THE STREETS.
>> Reporter: ACTIVISTS SAY THEY
KNOW WHAT WILL GET PEOPLE OFF
THE STREETS.
>> THE SOLUTION IS SIMPLE.
THIS IS WHAT THE SOLUTION IS.
THIS IS ONLY THING THAT ENDS
HOMELESSNESS.
IT'S THIS RIGHT HERE, HOUSE
KEYS.
UNTIL EVERYBODY GOT THEM, HEY
YOU GOTTA BE GOOD NEIGHBORS
BECAUSE THEY GOING TO BE PEOPLE
SLEEPING ON THE STREETS.
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF SOLUTIONS
THAT WE ARE FOCUSING ON
CURRENTLY IN TERMS OF TRYING TO
EXPAND OUR INTERIM SHELTERS BY
CAPACITY.
BUT WE ALSO KNOW WHAT THE ONLY
SOLUTION IS TO HOMELESSNESS,
WHICH IS PERMANENT HOUSING.
>> Reporter: MILLER TOLD
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND THE CITY OF
L.A. HAD EMBARKED ON AN
UNPRECEDENTED DRIVE TO BUILD
10,000 UNITS OF HOUSING FOR THE
CHRONICALLY HOMELESS: THOSE
WHO'VE REPEATEDLY ENDED UP ON
THE STREETS OR BEEN THERE FOR AT
LEAST A YEAR.
IT'S FUNDED THROUGH A $1.2
BILLION CITY BOND OVER THE NEXT
10 YEARS.
THAT'S IN ADDITION TO A $30
MILLION "BRIDGE-HOME" PROGRAM
DIRECTED AT PROVIDING INTERIM
HOUSING IN THE MEANTIME.
AND THE EFFORTS MAY HAVE STARTED
TO PAY OFF.
THIS YEAR, THE HOMELESS COUNT IN
L.A. COUNTY WENT DOWN FOR THE
FIRST TIME SINCE 2014.
ONLY MODESTLY, FROM 55,000
PEOPLE TO JUST UNDER 53,000, BUT
IT BUCKS A SIX-YEAR-LONG TREND
IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
>> WE ARE CAUTIOUSLY OPTIMISTIC,
WE ARE CELEBRATING THE FACT THAT
THERE SEEMS TO BE A CHANGE IN
THE DIRECTION OF THE TRAJECTORY
AND IT DOES TELL US THAT WE ARE
DOING SOMETHING RIGHT.
>> WELL THEY WERE CONSIDERATE
ENOUGH TO GIVE US A PANTRY.
>> Reporter: JOSE SOTO, ANOTHER
VETERAN, IS ONE OF THE LUCKY
ONES WHO HAS RECENTLY BEEN
HOUSED AFTER YEARS IN AND OUT OF
PRISON AND SKID ROW.
>> I'M REALLY HAPPY WITH THE
CLOSET SPACE.
BUT, WHAT DO YOU FILL IT WITH?
>> Reporter: SOTO, WHO IS IN
RECOVERY FROM DRUG AND ALCOHOL
ADDICTION GAVE US A TOUR OF THE
RESIDENCE THE CITY HAS PROVIDED
TO HIM FREE OF CHARGE.
>> I'VE BEEN ON AND OFF THE
STREETS FOR WHAT YEAR IS IT?
WOW, 14 YEARS AND IN MY
SITUATION, IT WAS ALL DUE TO
SUBSTANCE ABUSE.
I JUST LIKE TO GET DRUNK A LOT
EVERY DAY.
AND THEN, BEFORE YOU KNOW IT,
THE LIFESTYLE CATCHES UP AND I
END UP, I'M ONE OF THE PEOPLE ON
SKID ROW OR UNDER A BRIDGE.
>> Reporter: UNTIL NEWER HOUSING
COMES ONLINE HOMES LIKE THIS ARE
IN VERY LIMITED SUPPLY.
ONLY VETERANS WHO HAVE GONE
THROUGH A LENGTHY RECOVERY
PROCESS FROM SUBSTANCE ABUSE
QUALIFY FOR THIS BUILDING.
>> THEY TREAT US LIKE TRASH.
>> Reporter: FOR VET WILLY VAN
SEALS WHO IS STILL STRUGGLING
WITH ADDICTION, THAT SEEMS LIKE
A DISTANT PROSPECT.
>> I WENT THROUGH REHAB.
AND WHEN I WENT THROUGH, THEY
PROMISED ME WHEN I GOT THROUGH
THAT THEY WOULD ACTUALLY GIVE ME
MY VOUCHER AND I COULD GO AND
FIND ME A PLACE TO STAY AND NONE
OF THAT HAPPENED.
THIS IS WHERE I ENDED UP AT.
>> Reporter: SO DID YOU MANAGE
TO KICK THE HABIT IN REHAB?
>> NAH.
>> AMERICA PAINTS OURSELVES AS A
"GOOD SAMARITAN COUNTRY."
I'M GLAD THE U.N. CAME HERE,
BECAUSE YOU SEE THIRD WORLD
CONDITIONS RIGHT HERE, YOU KNOW,
IN THE RICHEST COUNTRY IN THE
WORLD THAT'S WORSE THAN OTHER
COUNTRIES.
>> Reporter: THE UNITED NATIONS
REPORT NOTWITHSTANDING, THERE
ARE OTHER INDICATIONS THINGS MAY
BE IMPROVING FOR THE HOMELESS IN
L.A.
IN 2016, ANGELINOS VOTED
OVERWHELMINGLY FOR A TAX
INCREASE DIRECTED AT FUNDING THE
CREATION OF HOMES FOR THE
CHRONICALLY HOMELESS.
AND WHILE TENTS STILL LINE THE
STREETS OF SKID ROW, THIS YEAR
CHRONIC HOMELESSNESS HAS DROPPED
18% IN L.A. COUNTY.
>> WHEN IT RAINS, YOU MUST HAVE
SOMETHING ON THIS FLOOR.
>> Reporter: BUT FOR WILLY VAN
SEALS AND OTHERS LIKE HIM, LOS
ANGELES STILL HAS A LONG WAY TO
GO.